Once around Nova 1934,
DQ Hercuis.
So DQ Hercuis or Nova Hercuis 1934 was a
bright nova, a new star
in the constellation of Hercules.
And you can see the position marked up
in the top leftand corner of Hercules
there with the little red ring almost on
the border over into the constellation
of Lyra. And we have an image of it. Not
very spectacular, just a bright ring
like star. No diffraction spikes on it.
So something slightly unusual about it
for that brightness.
It was on the 13th of December 1934
when JPM Apprentice from Stow Market in
Suffukk, not very far from here,
discovered that a new star had appeared
in the constellation of Hercules that
hadn't been there before. And this
continued to brighten up until the 22nd
of December 1934,
magnitude 1.5. So actually a very bright
star indeed, visible to the naked eye
and visible for several months. Now you
can see down at the bottom right there
we have the before with the arrow
pointing out the faint star at about
magnitude 15 or something. Um and then
afterwards just how bright that star had
become in another photograph there. So
really tremendous uh change in
brightness and the change in brightness
is recorded in what we call a light
curve. So we have the magnitude there
from um the uh first record of it going
up to magnitude about 1.5 at the peak
coming down and then taking a sudden
deep dip back down to about magnitude
13.5
rising back to six and then declining
from 6 7 8 down to 10 in a fairly slow
and steady manner. But you can see that
actually within that light curve there
is hiding a very rapid oscillation. If
you know what you're looking at, you can
see in that band, that thickening of the
line that actually it's oscillating very
much faster really than the sampling
interval that this graph uh shows. So
there's a couple of interesting things
about that. The deep dip goes along with
the fact that when the spectrum of the
light was analyzed, you can see the
nitrogen, silicon, carbon, and helium
lines present in the spectrum there. And
the deep dip in the light curve was
because of the formation of a whole lot
of new dust uh dust grains blocking the
line of sight to the brighter star
behind.
And a lot of that dust is carbon,
silicon, silicon carbide, uh silicon
oxides, so sand grains and the like. all
making up this uh material that was
black and blotting out the starlight.
There's a modern amateur photograph of
the object. So rather than it being
overexposed mess now we can actually see
there is a faint yellowishcoled ring
with a bright dot in the center. So it's
beginning to look like something that
we've seen before in other observations.
And in particular, here's a zoomedin
professional photograph of it with this
green elliptical ring of material
surrounding the uh bright yellow object
in the center. And it's starting to look
now like a planetary nebula. A planetary
nebula, the ring of material ejected
from a dying star. So this was
interesting in that perhaps this was the
formation of such an object. Um, now
it's about 32x 24 arcsec. Uh, the
smallest observation that a telescope of
sort of high-end amateur grade can make
is around three arc seconds limited by
the turbulence in the atmosphere. So on
an amateur photograph, you could hope to
get maybe 10 pixels across on this
object, something like that. Um, so it's
quite small, but uh it can be tracked
down.
And here's a couple of images here. The
first one taken in 1997
with the William Hershel telescope and
then 21 years later at the exact same
scale. The object is clearly seen to
have um expanded in size. The two
central objects have remained the same,
but the ring of material is now larger
and extending more towards the faint
dark dot uh just above where it says
2018 up and right from the eight there.
You can see it. And the gap between that
and the similar object just above the
one of 1997 is considerably smaller. And
this is the expansion of that ring of
material moving outwards about.16
of an arcsecond every year can be
calculated over that 21 years of
expansion. And obviously you can run the
clock backwards and it shows that this
ring of material started expanding in
1934.
So that all makes sense with the
eruption that was uh the source of that
sudden increase in brightness.
Now when we look at the central object,
we discover that it's an eclipsing
binary. It's a pair of stars orbiting
around each other and very rapidly
indeed in just 4.65 65 hours. They
rotate around and the uh larger of them
blocks out the light from the brighter
smaller object uh and creates the very
big dip in the light. You don't tend to
see the dip in the light the other way
round because the uh larger red object
is much much fainter and so it's much
harder to see any effect of it being
obscured.
Plus actually the nature of the two
objects. The bright white object is in
fact a much tinier white dwarf star and
so it doesn't block very much of the
light from the red dwarf when it passes
in front. And in the animation that's
been dramatically
overstated. You can't really see it in
the black line that's uh in the center
of the image here which is the true
data. You can only see the main eclipses
when the white dwarf, which is much more
uh luminous, is obscured by the red
object going in front of it. [snorts]
And so what we have is a white dwarf 60%
the mass of our sun and a red dwarf
that's 40% the mass of our sun. So that
will be uh perhaps the white dwarf will
be the size of the earth and the red
dwarf might be 10% the size of our sun.
So the uh total area that it's covering
is easily able to block out the white
dwarf. But the other way round the white
dwarf can't really block the whole disc
of the red dwarf from our point of view.
And they're so close together that 6
point uh sorry 4.6 sixh hour long orbit
that they are an interacting binary
pair. The material is uh [snorts] so
close together that really they're
almost on the point of merger and this
creates what we call a cataclysmic
variable. The gravity of the white dwarf
at that range is very intense and is
able to pull material from the outer
layers of the red dwarf star. it fills
up what's called the rash lobe uh
heading towards the downhill slope of
the gravity to the white dwarf and is
ripped away um and then spirals into an
accretion disc of material around the
white dwarf that gets quite hot and the
temperature there you can see is between
5,000 and 13,500
Kelvin in that accretion disc
and you get a streamer of material
coming from the red dwarf that impacts
the disc at one particular spot. And so
we get a hot spot there. And we can see
that hotspot effect in the data. That is
what's causing that very rapid rise and
fall because there are pulses from it
every 71 seconds as it's uh
receiving all that material coming over
from the star. Now you can see the rate
of accretion there. It's uh 2.7 * 10 -9
solar masses a year. So it's not really
going to amount to a huge amount of mass
transfer. If you give it a billion
years, you would have 2.7 solar masses
transferred. But of course, the red
dwarf doesn't weigh that much. So um in
fact, it's only 04
of a solar mass. So you can work out
that you would need uh quite a number of
uh hundreds of millions of years for the
entire red dwarf to be transferred over.
And if you did that, then the white
dwarf would increase in mass from 60% of
a solar mass to one solar mass. So it's
still not going to get massive enough to
detonate as a type 1A supernova.
So what's happening is that the lumps of
material are making their way across uh
getting flash heated when they hit the
accretion disc and creating this uh
pulse of light. So it's almost like
observing a pulsar only there's no
neutron star involved here. This is just
the gravity of the white dwarf um doing
things at a much more leisurely pace and
a much lower temperature.
Now in particular, the white dwarf star
is rotating in the center very rapidly
and it is generating a fairly intense
magnetic field. And so as the material
falls across from the red dwarf towards
it, the m uh ionized gas gets
tangled up in the magnetic field around
the white dwarf and that redirects it to
flow round the
magnetic field lines. Once it gets to
the inner edge of the inner disc of the
accretion disc, the magnetic field takes
over and funnels it in to the poles. And
so material is flowing down the magnetic
field onto the poles of the white dwarf.
Both the north and south magnetic poles
receive material. Um, and that creates
the most fantastic emissions there,
which is partly what we're looking at.
So
the uh another example of a star like
this is also in Hercules uh V466
Hercules. This was also a nova that
flared up but only to magnitude 2.8 on
this occasion. And you can see this was
at the other corner of Hercules down in
the lower left there in little ring on
the map. Um, so rather than DQ, which
was up at the top left of Hercules, this
is at the bottom left. Um, but this one
flares up in what we call dwarf novi
once every 15 to 30 days. So once or
twice a month, something like that, we
get this flare up of this star. And so
the the reason that uh I mention this is
that we are staring fairly carefully
with our telescopes at DQ because it's
been nearly a hundred years since
anything happened there by way of a
flare up. Um and so statistically
there's a fair chance that it may do so
fairly soon, although it may be another
thousand years. Um and uh we could have
quite a long time to wait. So, it's
interesting to see that these Novi,
these cataclysmic novi with a a red
dwarf being eaten by a white dwarf um
and where the white dwarf is highly
magnetic tend to create these uh
flare-ups as uh the material flows
across.
And another name for DQ Hercuis or Nova
1934 is the Superman star. Because as
one of the brightest objects to suddenly
appear in the night sky that year, it
drew an awful lot of media attention.
And the suggestion is that the creators
of the original Superman story in the
comics um that are pictured here in the
image at their drawing board um were
inspired to write the origin of Superman
as having come from uh this particular
suddenly flaring nova. And so here's
another image of it for you. DQ Hercuis
taken in 1993 by the Isaac Newton
telescope on the Canary Islands. Um,
shown with a lot of color there. So,
they've definitely wound the color up.
Anyway, thank you very much for
listening to that short talk about a
very interesting cataclysmic nova
DQ Hercuis.